Introduction
============

How does the usage of white LED flash affect our data?

Litt om estimeringsmetoder og problemer - og at det er særlig vanskelig
for nattaktive og sky arter. Litt om bruk av kamerafeller og metodikk
som er i enorm utvikling. Binde opp til NINA arbeid og samarbeid i
Skandinavia

Capture Recapture models only available for naturally marked species
(e.g. tigers *Panthera tigris*, leopards *Panthera pardus*).
“Nevertheless, the majority of wildlife species are not easily
individually identifiable from photos, rendering CR approaches difficult
and leading to widespread interest in alternate analytical approaches
for ‘unmarked’ species” @Burton2015

Camera traps give us the opportunity to monitor in a quantifiable,
somewhat standardised way, that is almost non-invasive. Normally the
cameras have been using infrared light to flash animals during the
night, as this was believed to be invisible to the animals (although -
unfortunately for us - it is not). However, the lack of sharpness and
detail in these photos limit the information we can retrieve from them
(e.g. individual variation in coloration), which has brought us to the
usage of white LED flashes. Naturally, the white LED flash is highly
visible for any surface dwelling mammal, which begs the question to what
extent it impacts the animals. Or rather, to which *additional* extent
it impacts the animals, and therefore, how it affects our data. Animal
sightings by camera traps can be used to measure species density, and
any deviation from the norm in probability of sighting, will skew the
precision of the estimate. @Beddari2019 showed that wolfs (*Canis
lupus*) tend to shy away from camera traps using white LED flash, whilst
the lynx (*Lynx lynx*) is less bothered, compared to the usage of
infrared flashes. The wolfs were more shy and aware of all cameras in
general, attributed to their higher sense of smell, which is a reminder
that each species will perceive the camera presence different, and thus
behave differently as a respone to the stimuli.

###### Ledestjerne

In this study, I will attempt to quantify how the usage of white LED
flash affects the detection rate of *the most common large mammal
species in the area* and whether this effect correlates with other
factors as urbanisation.

\* Hypothesis 0: Usage of white LED flash will have no effect on the
detection rate of any species.

\* Hypothesis 1: Usage of white LED flash will stress one or more
species in general, and therefore lower the detection rate of the
stressed species. The effect will likely vary in extent between species.

\* Hypothesis 2: The effect of the white LED will correlate with
urbanisation-factors, as individuals that live closer to urban areas are
habituated to Artificial Light At Night (ALAN), and thus will have a
weaker response to the white LED

Method and materials
====================

Study species
-------------

The species I’ll focus on in this thesis are the species that most
frequently was observed *(&gt;50 events)*, excluding farmed animals
(e.g. cattle), humans and dogs, and grouped categories of animals (e.g.
birds). Given that the decisions on camera placement (height and angle)
were made with the aim on photo capturing lynx(), I have also excluded
smaller species from the analysis. This includes three species,
squirrel(), hare() and European pine marten*(Martes martes)*. Though
they showed up frequently on many locations, there are inevitably some
cameras that are too biased towards larger animals, resulting in an
inconsistency of their detection rates. In turn, it is difficult to
distinguish whether the species was affected by the white LED or not, as
they could have triggered the camera, but already escaped the frame. In
the end, the species I have used in my analyses are roe deer*()*, red
fox*()*, badger*(Meles meles)*, moose*()*, red deer*(Cervus elaphus)*
and lynx.

Study area
----------

The study area (59.36-60.47° N, 9.43-10.91° E) extends over much of the
southeastern parts of Norway in counties Flå, Krødsherad, Sigdal,
Ringerike, Modum, Hole, Lier, Øvre Eiker, Asker, Oslo, Enebakk, Indre
Østfold, Våler, Råde, Moss, Frogn and Vestby. The climate has a
continental character due to rain shadows of the mountain ridges from
the west.

The mean annual temperatures ranges from 2-6and precipitation lies
between 700-1500mm (@Moen1999). Topography is predominantly flat towards
the south, and more rugged and elevated towards the north. The landscape
is a mosaic of forest and agricultural areas, divided with a wide
network of gravel roads. The area is situated in the southern boreal and
the boreonemoral zones. Norway spruce (*Picea abies*) and Scots pine
(*Pinus sylvestris*) make up the dominating boreal coniferous forests,
with frequent presence of silver birch (*Betula pendula*) and downy
birch (*Betula pubescens*), then aspen (*Populous tremula*), alder
(*Alnus incana*) and black alder (*Alnus glutinosa*).

Growing season length 170 - 190 days (Moen, 1999, map 6, s.21) Snow
cover length Most cameras were set in forest areas, usually by a tractor
path or human trail, sometimes by animal paths. Their distance from
houses or roads varied to a large extent, and some areas were logged
(ved Vansjø) and even greatly changed under development of new
infrastructure (toglinje på nordligste kamera  1255)

Study design
------------

For the study I chose 60 already established camera sites with infrared
light(Reconyx and Browning models). The cameras had been installed on
trees 1-3 meters from human or tractor paths, 40-120 cm above ground
level, with the original aim to photo capture lynx (@Odden2015). I
divided the sites randomly into three groups of 20 cameras. Cameras in
group A remained unchanged, whilst group B and C were equipped with an
additional white LED camera (Reconyx PC850) in alternating 3
month-periods, as shown in figure.

![Experiment setup<span
data-label="fig:exp_set"></span>](experiment_setup)

The preinstalled cameras were set up and handled by people from the
Norwegian Institute of Nature Research (NINA) and — at the sites further
from Oslo — by members of the Norwegian Hunters and Fishers Society
(NJFF). The installation of the cameras did not follow a strict
protocol, nor were their locations chosen randomly. The overall
placement was systematic as decided by NINA, then there was a
deliberately-biased placement of the CTs put up in areas where the
individual handler deemed it most likely to photograph lynx, and hence,
based on a combination of site accessibility and expectations of animal
occurence As shown in figure, I set up all white LED cameras above the
cameras already in place. However, at the particular site shown in
figure the infrared camera had been installed so far above ground level
that I chose to position the white LED camera below the camera already
in place. For the periods without white flash treatment, I moved the
cameras to their next site. However, the boxes installed on the trees
remained (see figure \[fig:cam\_ex\_d\]). First, I equipped Group B with
an additional white LED as seen in . After approximately three months, I
moved the white LED cameras to group C. These two periods were both
marked as period 1-1, as seen in . The camera boxes remained at each
site untill the end of the experiment. Note that group C had no extra
boxes before the start of their first period in May 2019 (i.e. remained
identical to the control group A untill May).

\[fig:period\_timeseries\]

I visited sites of group B and C at least once every three months in
order to move the LED cameras. For convenience I visited sites of group
A less often. However, as the cameras were part of other, ongoing
projects, they were occasionally visited by other workers from NINA to
retreive the Secure Digital memory cards (hereby SD Cards) for data.
This was mostly the case for sites close to, and south of, Oslo, or
rather, the cameras not normally operated by members of the NJFF.

<span>.5</span> ![The preinstalled cameras varied in the way they were
set up. Lower cameras with infrared, upper cameras with white LED
(except in example c)<span
data-label="fig:cam_ex_main"></span>](/cam_install_example/IMG_20190212_161615169 "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![The preinstalled cameras varied in the way they were
set up. Lower cameras with infrared, upper cameras with white LED
(except in example c)<span
data-label="fig:cam_ex_main"></span>](/cam_install_example/IMG_20190515_170952923 "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![The preinstalled cameras varied in the way they were
set up. Lower cameras with infrared, upper cameras with white LED
(except in example c)<span
data-label="fig:cam_ex_main"></span>](/cam_install_example/IMG_20190521_181329313 "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![The preinstalled cameras varied in the way they were
set up. Lower cameras with infrared, upper cameras with white LED
(except in example c)<span
data-label="fig:cam_ex_main"></span>](/cam_install_example/IMG_20190529_181049340 "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

Data Collection
---------------

Five different models of RECONYX™ (address: 3828 Creekside Ln, Ste 2,
Holmen, WI 54636, USA, www.reconyx.com) cameras were used, and one model
of BROWNING™ (address: One Browning Place, Morgan, UT 84050, USA,
www.browningtrailcameras.com), details in table \[tab:cam\_mod\].

Reconyx-cameras have been reported of having an average trigger speed of
0.2 seconds, whereas the Browning model was reported an average of 0.7
seconds (Trigger speed shootout, @Trailcampro2014).

  ----------- ------------------------------------ ------------ --------------- ---------------- ----
  Producent   Model name                             Flash type   Trigger speed   photos/trigger    N
              HC500 Semi-Covert IR                           IR            0.2s                3    ?
              HC600 High-Output Covert IR                 Black            0.2s                3    ?
              PC800 Profoessional Semi-Covert IR             IR            0.2s                3    ?
              PC900 Professional Covert IR                Black            0.2s                3    ?
              PC850 Professional White Flash LED          White            0.2s                8   20
  Browning    Spec Ops: Extreme                              IR            0.7s               24 
  ----------- ------------------------------------ ------------ --------------- ---------------- ----

  : \[tab:cam\_mod\] Camera models

Cameras were operating 24 hours per day. The RECONYX™ cameras were set
to take one time lapse photo per day in order to verify that the cameras
had been operational. They were set to take 3 pictures per series, as
fast as possible using *rapidfire*, and retrigger immediately using *no
delay*.

The BROWNING™ cameras were also set to rapidfire, but to 8 photos per
trigger, which unfortunately made the memory cards more vulnerable to
filling up before being collected. This happened in some areas with
sheep and/or cattle, and sometimes due to triggering by vegetation.

Therefore, the BROWNING™ cameras tended to have more gaps of inoperable
days. As seen in figure \[fig:map\], there was a correlation between
latitude and camera type. In addition, there were a correlation between
camera type and which trail type the cameras were put up in. BROWNING™
cameras were more frequently set up in trail types easily accessible by
man, which in turn lead to more pictures of humans and vehicles on the
browning cameras.

These differences should all be kept in mind when interpreting the
models.

Whenever I noticed vegetation blocking the view of the camera, or
excessively triggering it, I removed the vegetation.

\[fig:map\]

Data processing
---------------

All SD cards were delivered to NINA for data collection. Firstly, a
facial recognition algorithm (FRA) is used to sort all the pictures.
Afterwards, a human sorter checks the softwares’ output, confirming all
the correct decisions (i.e. species detections) and correcting all the
wrong ones. The goal is to fully automate this process, which is a
request from The Norwegian Data Protection Authority (DPA) in relation
to usage of cameras in densely crowded areas (e.g. parks). As per the
four eyes principle, the detection rate of photographed species has gone
up as a result of the FRA (pers.comm. John Odden).

The output I got as a result, was a data frame containing a time stamp
for every shutter activity, including all meta data from the camera,
coupled with predicted species (FRA output, with a confidence number),
verified species (by human sorters), number of animals and distance from
camera. The time stamps from the white flash cameras were used to verify
whether an animal was in fact flashed or not, which I then used as my
main predictor in the modelling.

I defined one event as any 1 species passing with a buffer time of 5 min
before or after

The true number of active camera days are confounded by the inconvenient
lack of time lapse photos from the Browning cameras. To approach the
true number of active days, I assumed all Browning cameras to be
functional every day, unless the camera was inactive when I visited it.
In that case, I considered the camera inactive since the day of its last
photo.

Statistical analysis
--------------------

To test for effects of the white LED flash I used the R programming
language (@RCoreTeam2020), in the RStudio IDE (@RStudioTeam2020a),
adopting large parts of the tidyverse framework along the way
(@tidyverse). Session info in appendix \[app:sessinfo\].

### GLMM {#glmm .unnumbered}

To test $H_{1}$ I looked for differences in detection rate per day,
using Generalised Linear Mixed Models (GLMM) with the R package lme4
(@lme4).

My dependant variable was count data, which follows a Poisson
distribution ($ X \sim Pois(\lambda) $). That is, any value is a
non-negative real number (0, 1, 2, ..., k), and randomly distributed.
Thus, the error follows a non-Gaussian distribution, which calls for
*generalised* linear models.

My *fixed effects*, or predictors, were flash type (white LED
present/absent or control group), and time since deployment in days. For
the cameras that was equipped with an additional white LED camera, time
since deployment starts from the day I visited the camera, and set up/
took down the white LED. The control group’s “day 0” of the time since
deployment was set at arbitrary points by me when doing the analysis, in
order to obtain periods of similar lengths to that of the
experiment-locations. See period breaks in \[fig:period\_timeseries\].
Further, I also trimmed the period lengths down to a maximum length,
based on the median length of the IR and white LED periods. Thus, any
period exceeding the shortest median length, was trimmed down, as
visualised in \[fig:median\_period\]. As I expected there to be a trend
over time, I included an interaction term between the fixed effects.

![\[fig:median\_period\] Period
lengths](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/period-length-wControl-1.png)

<span>1</span> ![\[fig:timeseries\_figure\] Period
timeseries](../R/FLM_notebook_files/figure-gfm/effort-facet-1.png "fig:")

<span>1</span> ![\[fig:timeseries\_figure\] Period
timeseries](../R/FLM_notebook_files/figure-gfm/effort-facet-2.png "fig:")

As previously mentioned, there were large differences in height, angle
and microhabitat/ trail type between the cameras. Further, the different
periods were spread out across the year, leading to seasonal changes in
the dataset that weren’t syncronised along the time since
deployment-axis for each period. To account for these differences I
included random effects in my model for location ID and week of the
year. A mixed effect model was required to include both fixed and random
effects.

In sum, I needed a *generalised* linear *mixed* model (**GLMM**), which
I fit to a subset of each species using the function <span
style="font-variant:small-caps;">glmer</span> from the R package lme4
(@lme4).

In full, the formula was:

$$n.obs \sim time \times flash + (1|loc) + (1|week)$$

However, this model only takes into account whether a flash was present
or not. It can’t tell if the flash actually went off, or how many times
it did.

### Cox Proportional Hazards {#cox-proportional-hazards .unnumbered}

Therefore I set up a new column in my dataset called flashed, that told
if the flash went off in syncrony with the IR camera. I then used the
flashed-column to set up a time to event-analysis.

Also called Survival analysis, time to event-analyses compares groups’
risk of experiencing an event, and was first developed for use in
medicinal studies (e.g. cancer risk studies).

The difference between the groups is called the hazard *ratio*, and is
*assumed to be proportional* over time. That is, if after 2 days, the
hazard of detecting a fox (i.e. experiencing an event) for the IR-group
is twice as large compared to the white LED-group, it should remain
twice as large after 25 days as well. Or in other words, the IR-group
should detect twice as many foxes as the white LED-group in general.

The Cox proportional hazards regression model (CPH model) (Cox, 1972),
is a popular development of the time to event-analysis because it allows
for more than one predictor. I used the R package Survival
(@survival-package) and the function coxme from the R package coxme
@coxme-package to perform a CPH with mixed effects (fixed and random
effects).

Again, location ID and week of the year were used as random effects to
account for differences between the camera sites and seasonal changes
during the study period.

As fixed effect I used the flashed-column. If a species was flashed, it
went into the “flashed”-group, and time to next detection was recorded.
If the species didn’t reappear it was “censored” from the model.

In survival-analyses the time-variable is part of the outcome of the
model. Event (i.e. detection) and time is joined as a Surv-object by the
Surv function from the Survival package.

Both these models told me something about the fallacy of $H_0$, whether
I could reject it, or fail to reject it. If the null hypothesis was
rejected for a species, I considered $H_1$ to be true. Then I went on to
test $H_2$

### Spatial covariates {#spatial-covariates .unnumbered}

To test $H_2$, I performed a new CPH, and looked for an interaction
between the flashed-variable, and a spatial covariate for distance to
nearest house as a proxy for urbanisation and ALAN (data from FKB). This
time, I removed the random effect of Location ID in order to include the
spatial variation in my data. This complicate things as I now reinclude
latitude-correlation with IR camera models, different angles etc.

Kommentar: stopper her inntil videre. Det er truleg for liten tid til å
gjennomføre denne analysen, i tillegg til at den kanskje er vanskelig å
tolke / lite truverdig når eg ikkje kan kontrollere for forskjeller
mellom kamera lenger.

### P-tests and assumptions {#p-tests-and-assumptions .unnumbered}

For both the GLMM and the CPH mixed effect model, I used the Wald test
as significance test, with xyz distribution over df degrees of freedom.
osvosv.

The R package performance (cite) was used to check assumptions for GLMM,
and ggeffects (cite) was used to visualize the results.

R package Survminer was used to visualize the results of the time to
event analyses. The Schoenfeld test was used to check for the CPH’s
assumption of proportional hazards.

Results
-------

### GLMM

Results of the roe deer.

Model formula: n.obs   time.deploy + flash + (1|loc) + (1|week)

I fitted a poisson mixed model (estimated using ML and Nelder-Mead
optimizer) to predict n.obs with time.deploy and flash (formula: n.obs  
time.deploy \* flash). The model included loc and week as random effects
(formula: list( 1 | loc,  1 | week)). The model’s total explanatory
power is substantial (conditional R2 = 0.45) and the part related to the
fixed effects alone (marginal R2) is of 1.95e-03. The model’s intercept,
corresponding to time.deploy = 0 and flash = 0, is at -3.38 (95% CI
\[-3.97, -2.78\], p &lt; .001).

Standardized parameters were obtained by fitting the model on a
standardized version of the dataset. 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs) and
p-values were computed using the Wald approximation. Predicted counts
visualised in , model parameters visualised in .

<span>.5</span> ![Fitted GLMM model to each species<span
data-label="fig:glmm_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/raadyr-C-report-1.png "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![Fitted GLMM model to each species<span
data-label="fig:glmm_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/rev-report-1.png "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![Fitted GLMM model to each species<span
data-label="fig:glmm_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/grevling-report-1.png "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![Fitted GLMM model to each species<span
data-label="fig:glmm_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/elg-report-1.png "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![Fitted GLMM model to each species<span
data-label="fig:glmm_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/hjort-report-1.png "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.5</span> ![Fitted GLMM model to each species<span
data-label="fig:glmm_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/gaupe-report-1.png "fig:"){width=".8\linewidth"}

<span>.4</span> ![Visualising model parameters<span
data-label="fig:para_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/parameters-1.png "fig:")

<span>.4</span> ![Visualising model parameters<span
data-label="fig:para_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/parameters-2.png "fig:")

<span>.8</span> ![Visualising model parameters<span
data-label="fig:para_sp"></span>](../R/glmm_sp_files/figure-gfm/parameters-3.png "fig:")

### Kommentar

Så langt har eg fokusert på rådyr, men nå er det ikkje så mykje arbeid å
skrive vidare om resten av artene.

Planen er å lage eit felles plot i stil med eit av plottene i figur
\[fig:para\_sp\]. Då vil kvar art få kvart sitt konfidensintervall (CI)
for kvar parameter. Dei to øverste er vanlige effect size-plot, det
nederste er omformulert til ein ekvivalens-test som baserer seg på
bayesisk statistikk, kor man kan akseptere nullhypoteser, ikkje berre
avslå eller feile i å avslå.

Det er kanskje ikkje heilt naudsynleg å ta med, sidan eg ikkje har gjort
bayesiske analyser, men den har blitt modifisert til
frekventist-analyser også, og det er slik eg bruker den. Den oppfører
seg som ein kommentar til / visualisering av p-testen. Vis
parameter-effekten har heile CI sitt inni ROPE-området kan man
“akseptere” nullhypotesen, uansett om p-verdien seier den er
signifikant. Vis CI tangerer ROPE området kan man ikkje konkludere
angåande parameteret. For meg resulterer begge disse tilfellene i at eg
feiler med å avslå nullhypotesen.

Til slutt, vis CI er heilt utanfor ROPE-området, er effekten signifikant
(p &lt; 0.5) og eg kan avslå nullhypotesen.

Kva for ein variant av plottene synest du viser modellen best?

### CPH mixed effect

Discussion
==========

GLMM
----

The intercept-value is considered significantly negative, which is to
say that there were a low chance of detecting any roe deer at an
IR-camera the same day I visited the camera (see figure
\[fig:para\_raa1\]).

This makes intuitive sence, as most large mammals would be scared away
temporarily by a nearby human, especially the times i set up the
additional camera boxes, which I did with an electrical drill.

Anecdotally, once I saw a roe deer about to walk by a CT when I came to
inspect it. The roe deer saw me and fled, right before it was detected
by the camera. I’ve also startled two badgers close by a CT. However,
they didn’t run far away, and went on to repopulate the area quickly.
Chances are I’ve scared animals other times as well, but haven’t noticed
it.

The effect of time since deployment is non-significant, and
$\beta = 0.007$. That means there is no difference on the baseline
detection rate for an IR camera over time (after controlling for
seasonal changes).

For white LED flash $\beta = 0.04$, meaning that the intercept is
slightly higher than for IR, but the difference is non-significant.

The control-group has practically the same intercept as the IR-groups,
and all of the groups is showing a negative trend, non-significant trend
over time. The negative trends for the control- and IR-groups are
strange, as they should represent a baseline detection probability, and
any fluctuations in detection rates over the year should be controlled
for by the weekly random effect-argument.

Seeing as all the parameters related to time since deployment are well
within the ROPE area in figure (/ all have a non-significant p-value),
it is safe to say that these “trends” are only due to chance.

The raw count-plots in Appendix A also shows that there are more
outliers with extreme values (counts of up to 5 events per day) when
time since deployment is close to 0, than towards the maximum lengths of
periods. The largest counts stem from the control-group which in mainly
has arbitrary days set as their day 0 in each period. Only a few cameras
has a true visitation date as their day 0, which can be seen as their
first point after a gap in figure \[fig:timeseries\_control\].

Hypothesising:

**If** $H_1$ is true, and there truly is an effect of the white LED for
long periods on the detection rate of roe deer, this effect could in
turn account for the different intercept values of IR and flash, as the
IR periods usually starts after a flash period (with the exception of
the first IR-period, i.e. first red periods in figure ).

Remembering my study design, 20 cameras start with white LED, 20 with
IR. Intercept should theoretically be identical in the 1st period. 2nd
period; white LEDs are moved. New LED CTs should have same intercept
(unchanged detection rate), and new IR CTs should have a hypothetical
lower intercept due to the effect of white LED. 3rd period; white LED
moved, new LED CTs (IR intercept), new IR CTs (hypothetical lower
intercept), and so on.

Which sums up to 3 IR periods where detection rates could start lower
than that of white LED.

If that was true, and the white LED interacting with time had a
significantly negative slope, then the slope of IR should be positive,
as the roe deer detection rate returned to normal. The slope for the
control-group(time.deploy:flashControl) should represent a normal
detection rate, and be close to flat ($ \beta \approx 0$), intercept
possibly closer to that of white LED, than IR.

Kommentar {#kommentar-1 .unnumbered}
---------

Om “Hypothesising”-delen skal med på noko vis må den heilt klart
skrivast om, men eg inkluderte den foreløpig for å høyre om du synst den
har ein plass i diskusjons-delen ein eller annan plass.

I tillegg er mesteparten av skrift her truleg overflødig, men eg skreiv
den simultant med modelleringa for at eg skulle forstå meg sjølv igjen
etter at det hadde gått nokon dager. Kor utdypande er det verdt å gå i
detaljnivået her? Burde eg droppe å utdype ting som likevel ikkje er
signifikant?
